🔰 Basic Ansible Interview Questions
What is Ansible?

Ansible is an open-source IT automation tool used for configuration management, application deployment, task automation, and orchestration.

How does Ansible work?

Ansible uses SSH to connect to remote machines and pushes configuration or tasks defined in YAML playbooks. It is agentless.

What is a playbook in Ansible?

A playbook is a YAML file that contains one or more plays, which define automation across a set of hosts.

What is an inventory file in Ansible?

It is a file where the hosts or groups of hosts are defined. It can be in INI or YAML format.

What is the difference between a playbook and a role?

A playbook is a list of tasks executed on hosts. A role is a way to organize playbooks and other files into reusable components.

⚙️ Intermediate Questions
How do you handle secrets in Ansible?

Using Ansible Vault to encrypt sensitive data like passwords, API tokens, etc.

What are Ansible modules?

Modules are standalone scripts used by Ansible to perform specific tasks like installing packages, copying files, or restarting services.

What are facts in Ansible?

Facts are system properties collected by Ansible from managed nodes using the setup module.

How can you run only one task from a playbook?

Use the --start-at-task="task name" flag with ansible-playbook command.

What are handlers in Ansible?

Handlers are special tasks that run only when notified by other tasks using notify. Useful for restarting services after configuration changes.

🔄 Advanced / Real-World Questions
How do you perform idempotent operations in Ansible?

Ansible modules are designed to be idempotent. Custom scripts should also ensure they don’t change system state if it’s already as desired.

How to include one playbook inside another?

Use import_playbook or include directives.

What’s the difference between include_tasks and import_tasks?

include_tasks is dynamic and evaluated during runtime. import_tasks is static and evaluated at playbook parsing time.

How do you limit execution to a specific host or group?

Use the --limit flag:
ansible-playbook playbook.yml --limit hostname

Explain the use of when, tags, and register in Ansible.

when: conditional execution

tags: run specific parts of the playbook

register: store the result of a task for use later in the playbook

🧠 Scenario-Based Questions
How do you manage different environments (dev, stage, prod)?

Use separate inventory files, group_vars directories, or dynamic inventories and roles with different variable files.

What is a dynamic inventory in Ansible?

Inventory sourced from external systems (e.g., AWS EC2, Azure, GCP) using dynamic inventory scripts or plugins.

How do you handle failed tasks and retries in Ansible?

Use retries, delay, and until to retry failed tasks:

yaml
Copy
Edit
retries: 3
delay: 5
until: result.stdout == "success"
What is Ansible Galaxy?

A community hub for finding and sharing Ansible roles and collections.

What are collections in Ansible?

A packaging format that includes roles, modules, and plugins bundled together.